This is an interview with Steve Lambert by Matt
Vogel on November 25th, 1988 at Gulf Coast Sailing
Center in Clear Lake Shores, Texas. In the
interest of accumulating knowledge about the
Vietnam War, I am going to donate this tape to Texas
A&M Oral History Collection and the University
Archives. Is that all right with you, Steve? Fine.
Thank you very much. Steve, we'll first start off
with when and where were you born? I was born in
Houston, Texas, December the 8th, 1950. And where
were you raised up? I was raised in Houston through
most of my life, and then actually moved to
Pasadena in the early 60s. So I went through high
school in Pasadena area and grew up in Pasadena
through my teenage years. Were any of your
relatives in the military, and if so, when and
where? Yeah, my father was in the Air Force, went in
right at the end of World War II and spent some time
in Germany. And then my brother had joined the Air
Force about a year prior to me being drafted into
the service. And he was in the States most of the
time, although he did do a tour in Thailand, didn't
actually fly, did ground support services in
Thailand. What
did you know about the Vietnam War before you
joined? Not really a whole lot other than what TV
and media had put out. I did very little reading
about it. Basically, I understood it was a, quote,
conflict and not really a war, and that we were
there as mediators initially trying to basically
support the local government and You know, also
the French had stepped in, I understood, and they
were also in that type of a mediator type effect.
But it became a full-scale war from what we
understood. And, you know, until I actually got
there and saw what it was, I really didn't know, you
know, what the real thing was. You know, basically
the media had played it up more than what it really
was at times. And then at times they really didn't
have the truth thing either. Once you get there you
have to form your own opinion of what you're
looking at. That leads to one question that I did
forget to write down and that is when did you go to
high school and when did you go to college? I went to
Sam Rayburn High School in Pasadena, graduated in
1969. Next year I went to one semester, started
school at the University of Houston and did not
finish that full semester. And likewise, I was
married and was basically to work full time. And
therefore, my number got thrown into the lottery
and I was drafted. So if I would have stayed in
school, I would not have been drafted, probably.
When were you drafted? I was drafted in 1970, or
actually 69, actually. And shortly, right as soon
as I got out of the... thing that my name
immediately went in and my number was picked. So I
actually went to my orientation type thing in
October and November of 69 and went in in 1970. And I
want to say January, February of 70, yeah. Right.
At what basis were you trained and what type of
training did you receive? Initially, I went into
the Army. I went to Fort Polk, Louisiana. I went
through what they call their basic training,
which was more or less a military courtesy type
stuff, your general hand-to-hand combat,
military weapons training. We were trained on the
M16, light weapons, your hand grenades. your
first aid, some military tactics and stuff like
that. We had very little other than our normal
calisthenics, outsource, outdoor type
activities. We did do one overnight stint where we
basically did a maneuver or a bivouac where we went
out and spent the night in the woods one night. We
did a lot of marching and running and stuff like
that, but the actual overnight stuff, we only did
one overnight thing in basic training. By going in
January and February, it was very cold and we
would, in Louisiana, we did actually snow on us a
couple of times while we were there. So the
training was done in fairly cold conditions at
that time. And then shortly after that, I was
tested at the end that I was picked for what they
called AIT or Advanced Infantry Training. And my
MOS at that time was given me as what was considered
an 11 Bravo. which is infantry. From what I was
told, my basis was picked because of my answers on
my questionnaire, you know, that they gave me or
whatever on my testing. And I literally did
battery of testing for probably three or four days
in a row of all sorts of tests and questions and
stuff like that. And I have a gut feeling I was
picked mainly because of my experience with guns,
hunting as a kid, fishing, outdoors activities,
stuff like that, and I answered it truthfully that
I'd done a lot of that, so maybe that's why I was
picked. I really don't know. There was also a lot of
other people or guys that were picked that had
never been in the woods in their life or even held a
gun, so I don't know if that was the basis, but it
might have been. My AIT was spent also in Fort Polk,
Louisiana. It was more along the military tactics
more weapon handling. What kind of weapons that
were different? Well, we went, stepped up from the
M16 to the M60, the 20 millimeter, did the pistol,
.45 caliber pistol, did a .50 caliber machine gun.
We shot a weapon called a wall, which was a light
anti-tank weapon. We got to shoot that a few times.
got more proficient in the M16, a lot more
different training, not just shooting at fixed
targets, but moving targets and, you know,
actually moving where you run and shoot and fall
down or run and shoot and fall down. So more
activity from that standpoint there, but it was
still strictly a target type thing. AIT, we did two
or three different BIVWACs, but still there was
not that much overnight training or anything
really jungle warfare or anything that way. It was
pretty basic straightforward so in other words we
weren't trained to go to Vietnam we were just
trained in a standard military procedure where we
could have gone anywhere in the world whether it be
you know Saudi Arabia or Germany or Russia or
wherever you know from that standpoint so there
was no specific jungle warfare training at that
time. Were you ever taught Vietnamese? No. Did you
go to any other schools? Well after the AIT I was
elected or picked to go to what I was considered
shake and bake school or NCO or noncommissioned
officer school where I would become an E5, which is
a sergeant. When I went home on leave, I expected
that to be my orders. When I returned and my orders
came in, I was not picked and I was sent to a what they
call tracker school. Initially went in and worked
with dogs and then I went from there and did visual
tracking. This type of stuff was all done in the
jungle of Georgia area. We were at Fort Garden and
Fort Benning, Georgia. This was done more in the
heat of the summer type thing as it progressed
through my training basically. It got a lot
hotter.
We would spend literally days out in the woods with
our rucksacks, which were the same thing in
Vietnam. We had Vietnam-issue clothing. We had
carried M16s, and we were trained basically at
that time more of a jungle warfare type thing. We
were trained at that time also by veterans from
Vietnam, where in their basic in AIT, there was no
actual Vietnam veterans. They were your lifers,
if you want to put it that way. They were good men,
but they were not veterans of Vietnam. They were
strictly your lifer type guys that might have been
in World War II even, you know, been around
forever. Korean Warfare or something like that.
We basically learned more or less how to observe
the different movements in the woods and they
would set up ambushes for us and trip wires, booby
traps, stuff we would actually see in Vietnam
basically. So this was geared towards Vietnam? So
this was geared directly towards Vietnam and
tracking and of course at that time I did not have
orders to go to Nam although that's what I was being
trained for. And this went on for six weeks. And I
would say at least five of the six weeks I was in the
woods. So it was continuous intensive training in
the jungle. How many people were being trained at
the same time you were there? At that particular
location, there was only about 18 to 20 of us. And
out of those 18 to 20, I'd say at least a dozen of them
were dog handlers. So there's very few visual
trackers. So more or less, I was elected. or felt as
an elite type thing because of my abilities. I
guess a lot of it had to do with coloring. We were
color tested as far as color blindness. And
evidently your leaves and your trees and stuff
like this, as we were taught, they turn one way or
the other. The colors change just a little bit. And
this is something that is very, very hard for an
average person to pick up. But As we were taught, we
could see where a guy had walked through and just
brushed the leaves and they had changed and stuff
like that. So this was a very unique thing to pick
up. And of course, there's all kinds of things to
look for as far as the movement of the twigs and even
the sounds from the birds and stuff like that. If
somebody had walked through the woods, a lot of
times you can tell just by listening whether
somebody's been through there or not. So there's
lots of different things you can look for and
you're taught to see and pick up. And then maybe
that was also my experience of hunting As a kid, I
grew up hunting and shooting and stuff like that,
but that particular training, in my feeling now,
kind of looking back on it, probably saved my life
many times because of what I was taught in that
particular type of training. Okay, this leads to
the next question, and that is, please briefly
describe your Vietnamese tour of beauty. Okay,
just briefly. I went in, was assigned to an
infantry unit. We were company squads, you know,
leveled down through that. I was 101st Airborne.
At that time, we worked around the military zone,
the DMZ. Did you go through airborne school? No. I
did actually go through jump school as far as I
never... I did... Yeah, I guess I did in a way. When I
was at my... Visual tracker thing, we went through
a modified school. I did not go through a full
airborne blown airborne thing. When we were at
Fort Benning, part of the training we did there was
jump. We rappelled and jumped. But it was not what
would be considered a full airborne school. And
this was part of our training because we were
expected to possibly jump out of choppers. And so
we jumped out of choppers in a modified condition
rather than a full blown C-130 or something like
that. Yes and no. I did not get qualified 100% as
airborne, but I did jump. I got my wings or whatever
you want to call it from that standpoint, but that
was part of my visual tracker school. I could
actually jump and rappel. We did a lot of
rappelling, actually more rappelling than
jumping, but we did this at Fort Benning, Georgia
when we were at Benning. Anyway, when we were 101st
or Our main mission there basically was we would go
and work around the DMZ more or less securing areas
and more or less observation type thing rather
than assault. We would just basically go out,
observe the enemy, pull back and watch them more or
less rather than a massive takeover of any areas.
We at that time were in the process of turning over
the area to the local Arvin South Vietnamese Army
So we did a lot of working with them. I spent
approximately six months in that area working
with them. They turned it over to them. Because I'd
only been in the area for six months or in Vietnam
for six months, rather than being able to go home
with that particular unit, I was transferred to
the 1st Cav. And when they sent me to the 1st Cav, I
was fortunate enough to get my MOS changed and
upgraded to 11 Foxtrot or 11F, which is
intelligence. I went in with them and I got working
basically at that time it was an Air Mac unit which
basically was air mobile rather than the track,
half tracks or tanks or anything, the cavalry type
thing. We flew rather than rode in track. And we
would fly into an area and basically do the same
type thing. I was working through intelligence
and tracking enemy movement And we'd record it
basically that way. And I did do some
individualized missions type thing where we'd go
in with like three or four guys and be dropped into a
listening post area and just sit there and listen
and observe and see who was there and what was
there. Or I'd go in after an airstrike or something
like that and just kind of see what was there and
check it out. And then they'd pull us back out. So we
were just basically observing there again rather
than any kind of an attack mode or anything. We were
just there looking and observing more than
fighting. although there was several encounters
where we had contact and fighting and stuff like
that, so I didn't totally miss what was going on.
But our main primary mission was basically
observation rather than assaulting. That was
with the 101st and the intelligence, too? Yes,
exactly, both of them. Were they both at I-Corps?
Yes. What year did you go in, or what month did you go
into Vietnam? I went into Vietnam in, let's see, It
was 1970, and I'm going to say May. I
can't remember the exact date, but it was in the
middle of May. After your track and school. Yeah,
exactly. And then I stayed there all through that
year. No, it couldn't have been that early,
because I got out February. So it had to have been
later that December, not May. No, it was later. Let
me think about that now. I stayed, yeah, it was, it
was, it was, it was Clowry closer to September
because I remember more when I got out and I got out
around February. And I stayed there, you know, for
right at 14 months. So backtrack from there, you
can probably figure out exactly what it was. So you
got out on February 72? Right, right, exactly. Did
you receive any training, any further training,
once you stepped down the shores of Vietnam? No.
Okay. No. So all your training was in the States?
Yes, definitely. Okay, this is going to switch
over. You did mention about what your purpose was
there as far as being observational. Right. And
was there an overall strategy that you could see
that you were being part of? I mean, what was the
overall strategy as far as the U.S. forces were
concerned? Right. Initially, when I was with the
101st the first six months, our overall strategy
was to basically secure that particular area.
When you say area, is that the rural area? The rural
area around the DMZ at that time. The closest city
that we worked out of was a place called Fubai, and
we worked off of all types of fire bases, which are
basically a command post in the jungle or in the
swamp lands or rice paddies, as you have it that
way. But the artillery guys would set up these fire
bases, and we would work out of a fire base, which
would be a secure area, and then we'd run our
missions out of these fire bases. We'd either walk
out of them or be flown out. And we would just
basically go out and patrol a certain area, set up a
night ambush, and secure that area. So more or less
we were in a police state where we were just holding
the area and securing it. Then we started working
with the South Vietnamese, and they would
actually go out at the same time with us and do the
same thing. So if anything, we were training the
South Vietnamese to maintain their hold on the
country that we had established. By the time I got
there, basically the country was pretty much
areas were designated that we had and there was it
was just a I don't know sniper attacks and small you
know companies would would hit us and stuff like
that there was never a major offensives most of
those that all happened in the late 60s early 60s
late 60s by the time the 70s came along there was
really no major overruns or major offensives
there's a few in the country but it was pretty much
just small contacts here and there. There was no
major uproar anywhere, basically. Right.
Describe some of the operations that you went on
that worked rather well. Well...
Or if that's even applicable. Well, basically,
you know, just an average operation or whatever we
would do, say, as a company, they'd send us out in
squads. We had like 12-man squads. Okay. Okay. We
would be given an area on the map, and we would be
basically told that it was reported in this
particular area on these particular trails there
would be enemy movement. So we would be sent out to
go out and secure that particular area, set up a
night ambush, and more or less at that time, either
if they came, go ahead and shoot them or try to take
them captive. They wanted live captives so they
could, you know, intelligence purposes. That was
the whole thing. But we were to basically, if there
was enemy movement in the area, we would try to
eliminate that movement and re-secure that area.
Okay? So we would be flown out to a certain area, be
dropped, and we'd have to walk usually what they
call clicks and kilometers. We would have to walk
probably five or six clicks through the jungle to
this particular area, and it would be done in a very
quiet, you know, mode. Usually on a two- to
three-day mission we carried what was called
light to fight, so we had very light rucks with
almost nothing in them, you know, just our water
and a couple of days' rations and, you know, our
ammo, and that was about it. So we didn't carry a lot
of gear on a short mission like that. We'd go out in
the area, we'd find where the enemy had been
moving, and a lot of this was left up to the sergeant
and lieutenant type thing, you know, basically
through the compass headings and stuff like that.
They would actually get us there. And then once we
got there, we would set up our ambush site with our
claymores, and we'd set up a perimeter getting
ready for the people to walk through or something
like that. And then we would just sit there at
night, and we usually carried at least one
starlight scope in the squad, and we'd just pass
that around to the guys that was on watch at that
time. And if anything ever came in, you'd always
click your claymores and blow them, and then
everybody would open up fire at that time. And then
you'd call in people the next morning or whatever.
If you had to have an airstrike, you'd call in
something A lot of times we would call in the Navy up
on the DMC. There was one instance where we did call
in B-52 strike, and we pulled back and we found a
bunker complex. And we pulled back. They did a B-52
strike on the bunker complex. Then we went back in
to check it out after they dropped the stuff on the
complex that way. Did you ever bring in any
artillery spotters? Yes, we did. We really, yeah,
we used them off the fire bases every once in a
while. We found that they were not as accurate as
even, you know, the most accurate would be the
Navy. Those guys was always on the money. You know,
we'd call it and they'd hit it and we'd say, you
know, add 100, they'd add 100 and be right on the
money. The Army guys, they just didn't seem to be
there all the time. You know, you never could count
on them. And... You'd call for them and call for
them, and sometimes you'd get it and sometimes you
wouldn't. But the Navy was always there. What do
you think that happened? Do you have any ideas? I
really don't know. There was a prevalent amount of
drugs in the fire bases, and you don't want to blame
it all on drugs, but the guys in the fire bases
really did a lot of drugs, so it's very possible
they just couldn't care less. They were in there
doing their thing. Or it's possible they just
weren't properly trained to hit where you wanted
them to hit. Did they ever lose some short rounds on
y'all? Oh, yes. Were y'all ever in danger? Oh,
yeah. They hit all around us. That was a common
thing. But, I mean, we learned to expect it. We'd
always dig in, and we would pull back pretty good
ways if we could. Now, one time we had quite a bit of
enemy around us. We didn't know how many because we
were getting sniper shots from all around us. So we
called in a local artillery type thing, and we
basically gave them our position. and said, hit
around us, because we want them to shoot and knock
down the enemy around us. And they came in, and they
hit within 30, 40 yards of us, just right on top of
us, which was good. And then we said, add here, take
there, to try to move it around us. And they did
fairly good with something like that. But in a
situation, you never knew where they were going to
land. Where on the Navy, you could almost count on
pinpointing. If you gave them the right
coordinates, they hit it. It was up to the guy that
was calling it. And usually in the company, there
would be one or two, you know, trained artillery
guys that would go with us on a mission. And those
would be the guys that would actually call it. Now,
if it was just a squad, usually there would be a
lieutenant, a couple of sergeants, and then the
regular PFCs, you know, normal guys. And usually
the lieutenant would try to do it if he had enough
knowledge. And if not, one of the good sergeants
would do it. We went through lieutenants quite
often, and those guys, you know, they'd come and go
quite a bit, so it was... We'll get to those later.
Yeah, it was a situation where usually the
sergeant was most qualified to call in all
terrorists. You mentioned that you were
essentially, that essentially y'all were
turning the war over to the local ARVN units.
Right. Did you take ARVN out on any of these
missions? If so, describe your interactions with
ARVN. Well, basically what we would do... a lot of
times rather than take them with us we would
rendezvous with them at a specific point and then
we would proceed at that time and set up an ambush or
something like that or just patrol a certain area
with them and this was all done during the daylight
hours and we did not like to travel with them that
much because they were not really quiet You know,
for say, when you're walking through the woods,
you know, I want your pots and pans jingling and the
guys running their mouth all the time. You want to
walk quiet. And they would always talk and they
would smoke. And, you know, they really, like,
they could care less. You know, like, they were
drafted. They didn't want to be there either, just
like we didn't want to be there. But they just
really weren't, there wasn't a fear, I don't
think, in their lives like there was in ours. And so
a lot of times, you know, the guys, especially the
colored guys, they just say, man, I ain't going
out. Those guys are going to be there, you know. But
we would go out and set up ambush with them and show
them how to set up the claymores and show them how to
secure an area and basically try to teach them and
instruct them how to do these maneuvers we were
doing. And then we would more or less just kind of
send like a squad of guys would go with one of their
companies. We might be 12. They might have 25 or 30.
And we'd go out on the mission just as observers
with them sometimes and let them do it all. And we
would assist them if they needed assisting, you
know, that sort of thing. And, you know, that
pretty much is. Did their officers call the shots?
Oh, yeah, definitely. Yes, definitely.
Definitely. Yeah, it was a strictly chain of
command type thing, you know, same type deal. But
they just didn't have the discipline that our
military had. And, you know, not that our military
was the best in the world by any means, but the chain
of command is definitely there. And you know, it
was followed pretty closely over there. And, you
know, people depended on the other guy to stay
alive. And there was times when you, you know, you
couldn't cook because of the smell from food would
basically alert the enemy. You couldn't even
hardly open a can. We used a hand can opener called a
P-38. And if you're sitting there moving it back
and forth around the can, you had the noise when
you're opening the can. And you couldn't even open
a can of food because the noise would just echo
through the woods. You couldn't talk. And the
Arvin guys, they did it all. I mean, you know, they
do everything in the world. You know, they're pots
and pans and cooking their rice. I mean, you could
smell an Arvin camp, you know, a mile away. So, you
know, it was a situation where we did not really
like to work with them that much. And, you know, we
were basically, like I said, just trying to, at
that time with 101st, trying to get the area secure
so we could turn it over to them. And we were just
more or less in a stand-down mode for those six
months. Although there was quite a bit of contact,
we'd go out and actually come in contact with 25 or
30 of the enemy and have shooting back and forth and
basically people would be killed and stuff like
that. My original squad of 12 guys there's nine of
them that did not come back. And so there's only
three of us that made it back. So, I mean, you know,
there was a lot of guys that would get killed, and
the newbies would seem to go first. You know, they
just, a lot of guys coming out of basic training or
AIT who had no knowledge of the jungle, like I
wouldn't have had if I wouldn't have had my tracker
school, would come in and, you know, they'd just be
bopping down a trail and get blown away or step on a
landmine or tripwire or something like that. And
usually booby traps or snipers killed the
majority of them rather than major offensive, you
know, it was more or less a they'd wound one guy and
take two guys to carry him out type deal, you know,
that sort of thing. Did it seem like that, well, I
don't want to get to the enemy yet. Let me finish one
last question. Sure, no problem. And that is were
there any effective Arvin units that you knew of or
worked with? Yeah, there were some that were
better, yes. We always worked with different
units all the time, and There were some units that
did seem to be better than others, yes. There's no
doubt about it. It's just like any, I guess,
anything. It's the personnel that you're working
with. But there were some units that seemed to be a
lot more trained and better at what they were
doing, you know, that way. But overall, to pick up
on what you said earlier, but overall, do you think
most of them didn't really care? They were pretty
much overall drafted just like I was drafted, and
they didn't want to be there. And they could care
less who their government was or what, you know,
from that standpoint. So the overall feeling at
that time in that area, they just could care less.
Were they unappreciative of y'all? No, not
really. I think they were appreciative because we
fed them, we clothed them, we gave them their
weapons and their ammunition. And, you know, to
them it was great. I mean, they had food, they had
clothing, they had rifles. They were
appreciative from that point, but, you know, it
was a situation, you know, even, you know, the
Altieri and stuff like that, we'd walk up with
firebases that we'd built for them and, you know,
turn around and leave, and a month later we might
have to go back in there and take it back again after
the Arvids had done let the enemy overrun it and
take everything. And we'd go back and it'd just
totally be overrun and gone, and the Arvids would
lose it all, and they'd just turn, tell, and run or
be all killed. So they just, they weren't
fighters, and they really weren't interested in
securing anything. Although they did want what we
would give them. They had their hands out all day
long, but they really didn't care about it after
they got it, or try to take care of it, basically. I
guess they weren't too interested in the land as
long as they got the food. Yeah, we fed them and
clothed them, and they were pleased. They loved
it. It has been said that the enemy controlled the
night, and we controlled the day. Did this apply to
the areas you worked in? Pretty much. How did it
affect the way y'all operated? We very, very
seldom ever moved at night because that really was
when they moved. And they were experts at jungle
warfare where we were not. Even with their
training? Well, I probably could have felt pretty
good. Now, some of the special forces and stuff
like that were really trained to move. I know some
of the Marines and stuff like that, but your,
quote, basic Army infantry unit, was not trained
like that. They had no warfare as far as guerrilla
warfare or anything like that. Now, your special
forces guys and stuff like that, they were very
capable of going in and moving around at night and
being very good with the camouflage and stuff like
that where they could do their thing, but your
special forces were the only ones that really
could do that. The general consensus of the Army
over there, your average infantry grunt, they
called them, They could not do that safely. There
was just too many numbers of them, and they were too
clumsy and loud, and they just didn't have the
training to move around at night. Where your
enemy, which I found more of your what I would call
Viet Cong rather than NVA. So you didn't come in
that much contact? Not that many contact with the
regular Army. Now, we did see some, but not in
numbers at all, very, very limited. I guess the
most numbers we ever saw were actually Viet Cong.
And those guys were their typical pajamas, your
black-type suit, you know, and their little hats.
And they carried the AK-47s and, you know, brass
and tubes on their back, you know, of the food and,
you know, very little anything. They could move
very, very quickly and quietly through the
jungle, and you never even know they were there.
But it was a situation where, yes, they definitely
controlled the night. We would set up ambushes and
wait for them. Where if we moved, we would usually
run into a sniper or something and be shot at. They
would always see us before we'd see them if we were
moving. Whereas if we were actually sitting and
waiting for them, then usually we were a lot more
effective setting them up in ambush rather than us
actually moving. Did you set up any ambushes? You
didn't set up any ambushes when you were with the
1st Cav and with the intelligence. Yes, we did set
some up, but not near in the capacity that we did up
on the DMZ. The primary purpose of the 1st Cav?
Where I was was just observation. Okay, and
intelligence. Intelligence reporting, yes,
exactly, because when I was intelligence now,
There was a couple of times we did actually go up and
we set up a couple of ambushes because we wanted to
actually see how many people there were. And
rather than try to sit there and be quiet and let
them go by, we felt it would be better to go ahead and
ambush them and try to take some prisoners for
intelligent purposes. Did you ever take
prisoners successfully? Oh, yes. Oh, yes,
definitely. Okay. That was our main purpose when
we did do an ambush was to take them alive so we could
go back and actually have them interrogated. And
several times we would have prisoners and take
them back. When we did do that, they would fly out
and pick them up real quick. And I did several
times. I would actually, if I was in the rear and
they called in and said somebody had prisoners, I
would fly out with my training and act as a guard
basically to take the prisoners back to the bases
to have them interrogated. With their training?
Well, because of my being a, quote, infantry
soldier. See, a lot of these guys in the rear area
were only clerks and typists, and they had gone
through a basic training, but they had not been
trained in any kind of warfare whatsoever, where
they didn't leave the fire bases. They stayed
right there in the secured area of the fire base and
never really went into the jungle. So there's...
all different sides of the military that were
there, you know, that they never actually got out
and fought. You know, they might have gotten shot
at or had a firebomb thrown at them in the Saigon or
something like that, but they actually did get out
in the jungle and, you know, didn't see warfare or
anything like that. But we definitely did take
prisoners when we could, and they wanted
prisoners. Of course, they wanted headcount, and
there was a couple of colonels, you know, they just
thrived on shooting people and cutting their ears
off. This was not really... These were U.S.
colonels? Yeah, they really, you know, it wasn't
adequate. They were, you know, supposedly done.
You know, they didn't, it was hush-hush. But, you
know, if you came back and you had some ears, the guy
would give you a beer or something. You know, you
got rewarded for killing somebody, in other
words. Then I take it there was, you did hear the
rule of if it's dead, it's VC. Right, right. Did you
ever see any cases where... it was obvious that
that was dead villagers, old papa-san, so to say,
mama-san dead villagers that y'all counted?
Well, we never actually did anything ourselves.
Now, we would go into villages that had been
overrun, burned, that, you know, obviously in
the, you know, before we'd gotten there. And
sometimes we would actually have to dig up grave
sites. And we did this for a couple of reasons.
Number one, because a lot of times the enemy would
bury stuff in grave sites, and we would be looking
for their caches, which was basically food and or
weapons. And another thing, we were looking for
American soldiers. And in the respect that we were
basically on the mode, we were pulling out and
leaving that particular area, we would go in. If we
found a village in a grave site that looked like it
was fresh, we would dig it up and inspect it to see
what it was. And I personally did not ever see any
women and or children shot or anything like that,
but I heard a lot about it. And, you know, there was
always the rumor that it did happen, but I never
actually saw any of it myself directly. Did you
ever see or see of any falsification of body
counts?
I'm asking mainly about Blaine. Yeah, I know what
you're saying there. I heard about them, but I
never saw anything directly. You know, some of the
squads that come back in and they say they found a VC
village and they had gone in and shot them and they
killed 20 of them or something like that. And, you
know, you say, well, you know, who were they? You
know, and, oh, well, mom signed, papa signed,
da-da-da, you know, this sort of thing. And they
say, you know, the ones they killed were men and
women, but they were all VC, you know. Yeah. you
know, you kind of say, really, were they or weren't
they? You know, you really don't know. And, of
course, they bring back all these weapons and
stuff like this that they captured that these guys
had. Now, whether it was VC staying in the village
and the villagers couldn't run them out and they
just went in and shot them all, you know, nobody
really knows, you know, that sort of thing. You
never could really tell. But I personally, in my
particular activity, never saw that or did any of
that. The one thing that you mentioned that I want
to ask about, Was it ever clear to you exactly who
the enemy was? No, not really. Did you ever get the
feeling like the enemy was every Vietnamese that
you saw and everyone? You could never really trust
anyone. They, like, sometimes I went back to the
rear area a couple times and, you know, you would be
in a secure base or camp, but their villages would
be all around the camp, okay? And during the
daytime, you could drive into the villages and
basically shop if you want to tell me you know from
that i mean we really didn't do that but i mean they
had stuff you could go in there and like as you go to
bars and drank and stuff like that and their
prostitution was very prominent there there was a
lot of girls you know you can always go get a girl get
a you know a layer or whatever you want to call it
that way they had real strict curfews at night and
they said do not spend the night in the villages get
back to the to secure camp And they said because the
VC at night come into the villages. And if you're
sitting there and sleeping in one of the hooches
with a prostitute, the VC come in there, it could
blow you away. Or that prostitute might really be a
VC and might cut your throat in the night while
you're asleep. Did you ever know of any particular
instances? The blacks did that quite a bit. They
really were into the prostitution and drugs a lot
more, not to – say they were worse or better than
anybody else or whatever, but it just seemed like
they were more prominent into it than anybody
else. That
would happen often, actually. You'd hear, well,
where's Murphy? Where'd he go? I don't know. He
never came back. This sort of thing. A day or so
later, you'd hear that you know, they found him in
the village, all his throat was cut or something
like that, you know, that sort of thing. So, you
know, it was something that, it didn't happen a
whole lot, but it was like the VC were around you
continuously and you never knew who they were,
ever. So, you know, from that standpoint, you
really didn't know who the enemy were. And in the
jungle, if you came across anybody in the jungle,
you always confronted them. And, you know, if
they... gave you any indication they were going to
run or shoot or do anything. You shot first and
asked questions later. I mean, you know, that was
the way it was in the jungle. And, of course, if you
came into an actual village, that was a different
thing. But, I mean, you know, just walking through
the damn woods or jungle, there was no
restrictions at all. You know, anybody moved, you
shot them. I mean, you know, it's as simple as that.
And, you know, you couldn't take chances out there
because the, you know, The villagers didn't need
to be in the jungle. The only people in the jungle
were the enemy, and they knew that. So they knew
they were fair game if they were in the jungle. When
they traveled, they traveled on the open roads or
on the big trails and open area. So from that
standpoint, anybody moving through the jungle,
those were the enemy. With your experience with
the 101st and the 1st Cav as intelligence, did the
VC mainly move at night? Yes, definitely. They
obviously knew. Yeah, they moved at night and they
were very safe and secure. Now, there's always
exceptions to the rule, but 90% of the movement was
at night. In my intelligence, especially, we had
several different listening devices and a thing
called Red Slayer, which was a heat-sensoring
device where the airplanes would actually fly
over a certain area, and it would send up a
radiation or whatever effect from the body heat of
the humans. And they could actually more or less
count how many people was down there and
everything, so they could see them moving in
particular areas. And you plot this movement over
like three or four days, and you could actually see
them moving down a trail. you know, in an area. And
we could send in a company or a squad ahead of them
knowing that was the direction they were going on
this particular trail and set up an ambush and wait
for them. Did that work well? It worked quite well.
But it was a situation they seemed to know where the
enemy were all the time. If they wanted to end the
war, they probably could have sent massive troops
in there and killed them all and got it over with.
But they never seemed to want to do it. It was always
little hit and miss ambush type stuff. So in my
mind, after getting into intelligence, I don't
know why they did what they did. You know, I just
don't understand it because, you know, the area
that I worked in, especially with the first Cav,
with the intelligence part, we knew almost every
enemy movement that happened almost on a daily
basis. And we could have gone in there and wiped
them out at any time. Now, would these have been NVA
troop movements? No, this was all Viet Cong, yeah,
V.C., yeah. This was around Cambodia area, around
the Cambodian border type thing where we were
working at that time. And they would dodge in and
out of Vietnam and Cambodia back and forth, and
there was always a gray line there where the actual
border was.
Yeah. Y'all used it as gray as possible. Yes,
definitely, yeah. It was as gray as far as you could
see. That's right. Just wherever you had to go, it
was gray. To sum things up, and through your
experience, how did you feel about the VC as a
fighting unit? Were they an effective fighting
unit? Were they well-disciplined? Or were they a
poor fighting unit? And just a terrorist
organization? I felt there was the actual Viet
Cong, per se, were more of a very well-trained
jungle warfare type hit and run type deal. They
were not a massive discipline military
organization by any means. It was a hit and miss.
They would come out and hit you and run. Hit you and
run. And all they would do would be like stick a
thorn in your side. They just hurt you, but they
wouldn't kill you. And they would more or less,
like I said, they would shoot one guy and take two
guys to carry him away type deal. And they did this
through their booby traps, They do this through
their sniper attacks, their mortar attacks in the
villages and the fire bases and stuff like that.
And it was more or less just a hit and miss. The NVA,
well, okay, the NVA, on the other hand, they were
more of a disciplined military type thing. And
they would travel in squads and companies similar
to what we did. And they would set up, and they would
actually, like if they were to overrun a fire base
or something, they would actually have it come in
waves. I mean, just like a normal military
procedure and stuff like that. So they were very,
very disciplined military-wise, chain of
command, the whole nine yards. with the uniforms
and the weapons and, you know, the backing and
stuff there, they had good training. That type of
thing I didn't see that much of, although I did see
one or two instances where they actually tried,
attempted to overrun a fire base in some of the
hours that we were on. Was this on DMZ? Up in the DMZ
or Fire Base Gibraltar was the name of one of them
that I was on. I remember that one real well. And
they would come in, and they'd come through the
Constantino wire, and they have zappers that
would actually come through the wire with satchel
charges and blow the wire up so they could run
through the wire. And, you know, the very first
indication, you'd be sitting there, you know,
sound asleep if you're asleep or on guard or
whatever. all of a sudden you hear satchel charges
going off, bam, bam, bam, bam, and the next thing
you know is here comes these guys all running
through the wire at you, and it'd just be a wave, one
wave right after another, and the guys would
follow the wire that was still there, and other
guys would jump on their back and climb over, and of
course, you know, you're sitting there, yeah,
just like a movie, you're sitting there shooting,
and the tracers would be going out, and they'd be
popping parachute flares to light up the area, and
so it was, you know, pretty much a disciplined type
deal, and You know, I never was totally overran on
the fire base, but they did get into the fire base
several times. Hand-to-hand? Hand-to-hand type
combat. How were they hand-to-hand versus
American hand-to-hand combat? Well, yeah. Was
there really any difference? Was there enough to
tell? Not really, not really. You know, it was a
situation they'd come up and they'd have their
bayonet type things and they'd try to, stick you
with their knives or something like that, or, you
know, they would actually come up and try to shoot
you, too, you know. But it would be close contact
type stuff. And, you know, they would come in. Most
of them carried AK-47s or there was some of them had
CHICOM SKSs and stuff like that, which had
bayonets on them up there. Some of the regular NBA
carried those, and they had some bayonets on them.
But, you know, it was a situation where they were
more of a military discipline rather than the
actual, you know, B.C., Did the NVA ever, as far as
you could tell, did they ever operate like a VC unit
in which it was a guerrilla type? No, not that much,
uh-uh. Okay. No. There was a clear definite.
Definite clear. Oh, yes, yeah, definitely.
Speaking of equipment, what kind of equipment did
you carry personally, okay, for any particular
mission you care to describe? Okay. And then the
company, too, that you worked with. Okay. And the
varieties? It depended on more or less how long we
were going to be out in the field. But that was the
controlling thing. If we were only out for two,
three days, like I said earlier, we went very
light, you know, just water and rations for a
couple of days and, you know, ammo, and that was
about it. We really didn't carry anything else.
Now, if we were going out for two or three weeks at a
time, which we did quite often, we would carry some
fairly heavy packs with bedrolls and poncho
liners and, you know, carry a lot of rations, a lot
of food because we couldn't get anything. We might
carry a week worth of food and water. Now, I might
carry seven or eight canteens of water, which, you
know, adds up a weight quite a bit. And then if the
dogs went with us, the dog handlers had to carry
water for their dogs. So, I mean, you know,
depending on where we were going and what we were
doing, the ruck stacks were designed basically
like your camping rucks that you see nowadays. I
think that kind of came out of the war or whatever,
but they were fairly comfortable and you could
really pack a lot of weight on them and not have to
worry too much. What I hated more than anything...